Choosing a Package/Module Name
==============================

This discussion is a complement to :doc:`/tutorials/packaging-projects`.

Make sure to choose a valid :ref:`Python identifier <python:identifiers>` for the names of all your :term:`import packages <import package>` and :term:`modules <module>`.
The name of the :term:`project` and the name of the :term:`distribution package` are one and the same.
It is the name you will see on PyPI, for example.
The name of the project and the name of the top-level :term:`import package` (or :term:`module`) can be different.

Moreover, one PyPI project/dist may ship more than one module or importable package — it is only possible that one matches the name, others can't.
It is recommended to have only one importable package, with a name as similar as possible as the `dist-info` file in the installation folder.

Project names (usually found in :file:`pyproject.toml`) and import package names follow different rules and conventions.
The normalized form (and thus the preferred form) for project names
is the so-called "kebab case" (see :ref:`name normalization`), for example ``abcd-1234``.
But import packages and modules should have a valid Python identifier as a name.

With an import package name ``abcd-1234``, the following would not work:
.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import abcd-1234
   >>> from abcd-1234 import something

Since ``abcd-1234`` is not a valid Python identifier.
(Importing such a module would be cumbersome, completely unnatural and against the long-established conventions in the Python community;
see, for example, :pep:`8#package-and-module-names`.
There is a way to import it anyway, see :doc:`importlib <python:library/importlib>` and this question_.)

:ref:`Python identifiers <python:identifiers>` follow the so-called "snake case".
The preferred form for an import package name is ``abcd_1234`` which is a valid Python identifier.
Note the underscore ``_`` as separation character instead of of the dash ``-`` seen in the project name.

Having a directory structure with ``src/abcd_1234/`` instead of ``src/abcd-1234/`` has 2 consequences:

- The following works:

  .. code-block:: pycon

     >>> import abcd_1234
     >>> from abcd_1234 import something

- All four build backends covered in the tutorial :doc:`/tutorials/packaging-projects` will work:

  - Flit will not crash with an error;
  - Hatch will recognize that the module corresponding to the package is ``abcd_1234`` instead of defaulting to ``src`` and building a not working wheel.

More information about :doc:`Python imports <python:reference/import>` and its :doc:`grammar <python:reference/grammar>`.

Another aspect of choosing a package/module name is the naming consistency
of the files generated by the build backend.
With the four build backends covered in the tutorial
(:ref:`Flit <flit>`, :ref:`Hatchling <hatch>`, :ref:`PDM <pdm>`, and :ref:`setuptools`),
when the correct import package is found, its name is always leaved as is.

But, starting from the project name, the build backend also generates:
- an archive file like ``abcd_1234-1.0.0.tar.gz`` with Flit, Hatchling, and PDM,
  or ``abcd-1234-1.0.0.tar.gz`` with setup-tools;
  here we can see that some backends but not all
  apply a normalization on the project name: lowercase, underscore ("snake case") instead of hyphen;
- a wheel like ``abcd_1234-1.0.0-py3-none-any.whl`` with all build backends;
- a dist-info like ``abcd_1234-1.0.0.dist-info`` with all build backends;
- in the case of setuptools, an egg-info like ``abcd_1234-1.0.0.egg-info``.

Thus, except for the archive with setuptools, all prefixes of filenames
use a normalization of project name.
This normalization will match an import package name chosen consistently
by normalization of the project name.
You may see an interest in installing a wheel named ``abcd_1234-1.0.0-py3-none-any.whl``,
and having as a result ``abcd_1234-1.0.0.dist-info`` and ``abcd_1234/`` (or ``abcd_1234.py``) in your installation directory :).

.. _question: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/8350853/how-to-import-module-when-module-name-has-a-dash-or-hyphen-in-it
